---
description: 'What''s more important: the tech, or the art?'
---

# 🎹 S1E2: #web3 Black Notes

### About

* January 20, 2022 | 7:30 - 8:30PM EST
* Twitter Space: [https://twitter.com/i/spaces/1LyGBokaDOOJN](https://twitter.com/i/spaces/1LyGBokaDOOJN)

### Rules

1. One voice at a time - If you talk over people we will give you a warning if it happens repeatedly you will be moved to the audience
2. No Shilling zone - Don’t sell us but feel free to tell us your story
3. Keep it in the middle- We can attach issues and topics but attacking people won’t be tolerated
4. Step up step back - If your talking a lot please step back and leave space for other voices if you are being quiet please step up and talk if your on stage (please don’t sit on stage silently we need your voice)
5. Feel free to share the room if it’s valuable

### Notes

* Intros & Ground Rules
* Discussion Question | What’s more important: the tech or the art?

#### Question | What’s more important: the tech or the art?

* Dom: s/o to James & Pat for having this room! It's a good question. I'd say right now, the art is what's more important. From what I'm seeing, being new in the NFT/web3 space, the first year it was more heavy on the tech side of things. Even the projects like digital art and music, I felt it was very fitting for stuff that I would see associated with tech-related things. What I'm seeing now is outlet of music NFT space to slowly shape and form. The artists who are making dope music way before web3 and doing this stuff have been getting themselves into web3, and people who are making major strides are doing so based on the art and being authentic. For me, it feels like it's the art that's more important. Even when you think about web2 with the artists, looking to the mainstream, in the web3 space, the artists who are getting shine are the ones who really care about the art. When you see the music or the art, they've been putting in the work and you can see it.
* PatJunior.eth: I want to give other people chances to speak before I get in spicy mode. But, I definitely agree. I will let others go around before speaking on it because I have a strong opinion about it.  Please share the space in the timeline! Let's go with JP.
* JPReynolds.eth: I'm on the art side of this. I heard this was going to be spicy. I like seasoning!&#x20;
* Pat: there should be a balance of both. I believe in excellence - that's how I was raised. My mom was the oldest of seven and my grandparents are no longer alive, but they instilled that virtue in me. So that's how I came up. So, I just, one of the things that I'm weary of in web3 is people are people that come from web2, who the music is maybe not quality and they're not able to succeed or do well in web2, and let's keep it frank. Some of the music is top-tier mid. So, because they're not successful -- Top-Tier Mid™️ -- there are individuals that come from web2 and finding the web3 space to be successful for them. But Top-Tier Mid™️ lowers the bar for Top-Tier Excellence™️. Some people might be investing in the tech. This goes back to my thoughts -- I co-own a sound design company called \[\[ ]] doing sound design and production. One thing I realized is that people don't know about Splice, and I'll keep my words limited, one thing I noticed is that there's a lot of tech people involved with Splice. The people that actually built the website or run the company -- many of them, for the most part, do not anything music. They depend on some other generic person to be the tastemakers and search for the talent. So you have some vendors that are really good, and then you have Top-Tier Mid™️. I won't name any vendors, but there's a lot of Top-Tier Mid™️ folks there. Given the way things are shifting, there's Top-Tier Mid™️ on the site. So, I akin that to, when it comes to collectors, they're concerned about the tech, and how this subscription thing is ran. That's where they're invested in, on the money side of it. A good amount of collector is invested in the tech, not so much about the talent. Some people, in my opinion, don't have good taste. So what ends up happening is that people who are Top-Tier Mid™️ from Web2 might be creative in other ways around music that allows them to get pushed to the forefront. And sometimes, it's not. I'm not a brown-noser. The tech is important, but the art is very important too. What I've seen and heard so far, shout-out to sound.xyz, but sound.xyz from the artists that I've heard, they brought nothing but Top-Tier Excellence™️ to their platform. I don't know a lot about the other protocols who are onboarding, but I give my props to sound.xyz on executing on the tech in an excellent way and onboarding the excellent artists. If I have to give it a score, it's damn near 100.
* Chakkra: This is a good point and goes back to this conversation -- are we doing this because we're all about the tech, or are we indulging in the music? Being in other rooms, people are talking about music and there's a large gap in this NFT music space right now between the people who are focused on the user interface versus the actual people that are honing in (like sound.xyz) to get artists to onboard artists, or getting specific platforms to do that (like onboarding focusing on black women or other minor creatives) _and_ to make space for folks like this. When you have these people rolling up in the place -- if we just allow the Top-Tier Mid™️ coming in, it will be like another search engine like SoundCloud, but you have to go for the diamond in the roughs where you find the best. For example, if SoundCloud did what it did in 2013-2014 but for 2022, it would be difficult to find the James and Pats and Lakim's and the Iman's and the Rome Fortune's because in that cesspool of sounds and these people who are putting out poor quality because they just want to put something out, they may need a homie to put them on. That can be difficult to follow the lead and follow the hype. Right now, it's who can follow the hype because it's like, are you willing to grind out and I know Pat's working on the Genesis NFT, definitely looking forward to that, but you're taking time to upload. This isn't a streaming service. This is another level of, "are you really serious as an artist? okay, let's see." Can you figure out the trenches and the tech and know how to maneuver through all of this. On the backend, I think it's also upto the developers and engineers to make sure that we have people that are reaching out to the right people. I don't want to put just anybody on the platform that are not looking for the substance we're looking for. You don't go into a KPOP space looking for rap. Yeah we have different blends, but let's be real: if you go to R\&B Radar, I'm not looking for a rapper at all. When focus is on a specific area, you get more control and more organization. I definitely feel your sentiments on that and where it could go. When you find those diamonds in the rough and scroll and search and there's an influx of information, and it's dope when you get in spaces like these because you don't have to go through forums and threads because it gives you easier access to real instead of fake.
* James: Pat and Almond -- the ground rules are actually for me, so stop me as well.
  * As an artist, the art should be equally important. We're early. So, because this is a space to navigate it, you have to know the tech, there are some people who understand the tech before their artistry is at a high-elite level. There are people who make great things in this space but don't get the tech. What I've seen, I feel like a lot of the projects, it's people who are using the tech and making art that's not culture shifting mind-bending art, but the whitepaper is impressive. It's part of a good plan for something to invest in. We're catching lightning in a bottle, where NFT is being used to make art. But in 20 years, it will be used to make many things. The tech will outweigh it. I think there needs to be more curation, but people get scared because of gatekeeping. But what if there was more onboarding? In a perfect world, it would be great to onboard and empower artists. Because of technology, art is more accessible to people. Before studios in your house, you had to really practice and save up your money and cut a record in a studio and tour that joint for a year. Yes, it's dope that the tech makes it easier, but it's a weird thing -- the tech is cool, but I don't know if the art is cool necessarily. The plan of the project makes sense. I want art to be as important, but tech is whooping art's ass right now.
* JP: There's a lot to digest with this question. There's a large spectrum. First response is  question: what's the point of departure for tech and art? To make art as an independent artist, you have to know some tech. Being able to rap is different from engineering a section, like learning Logic or another DAW is necessary to create the art in the first place. Can we create art without tech in certain ways? Second, tech is a tool. So, it's an interesting from point of departure. Third, how we're assigning  value to this because we talk about collectors and how they see what they invest in and how they invest in art. This is something we rub against and thinking of music as fine art. Music as fine art will have to face the same battle fine art -- but the collector thought it was alot of money because we give it value, and value begets valuable because they get the value. It's an interesting thing that's happening in the space, and it's not necessarily new, and music is facing this. There's definitely a "who's first" at the table type energy for who is getting on and who's getting attention. I'll leave it there.
  * Break from Pat: resetting the room and sharing rules, share in timeline if it's valuable! Let's sort the order of people to speak.
* mariworld.eth: No doubt, appreciate that.
  * Something JP brought up that was interesting was the idea of value. Re-creating value in art and the way tech does that. Tech is making it more accessible and making ownership of art more accessible. Whereas, before when wealthy people or corporations own the art, blockchain technology is now democratizing that ownership. In that sense, the tech plays a huge role, so is it more important than the art? Tech without the art has no cultural weight. But art without tech, is art for art's sake. I want to throw that out there and see where people are with it.
* David J.Butler: This is a super interesting conversation. I'm in the middle of rolling out a residency to help Black fine artists to find their way through the Metaverse. The conversation about structure, and what are your goals at the end of the day when you start with this question? As artists, we approach with art perspective, but the only reason why art and tech are intersecting is commerce. But for those who are trying to build platform, you care about ownership if you share with the world. So when you go to exchange value in the form of monetization, and make a living for yourself for your artwork, you interact with all of these systems because alot of people that feel left behind in this space. But the residency I am building is probably going to be something that's widely adopted decades for now, but it's important to understand the fundamentals. If you don't have the relationships or the tech knowledge, it can be tough. Tech is most important piece because it's the newest piece. So, what are your goals? If it's art for art's sake, then NFTs may not be the thing.
  * Pat: for web3, part of it, for artists, this is a way to create financial freedom: build a marketing plan, pay producers and all of that. I definitely respect the tech if you will. Respect The Tech™️.
  * David: last thing -- we haven't seen the development of new models yet. How I've been thinking of it and watching this project, people are going with profile picture models, but we haven't seen the new models yet. Maybe it's called quality coin where there is a barometer by type of music or having access to NFT could be followed by quality of your music, and who determines the quality. The part of it is needing to push NFTs -- but to JP's point, it won't be JPEGs. This is the note for your digital car and all the fashion stuff coming to light as well, and instead of replicating the current models, we need to see the development of new models.
  * Mike Moonman: David J. Butler already covered it for me.&#x20;
* lucas3.eth: Thanks, I appreciate it. I want to build off of what David was saying for building communities -- we haven't seen the models yet. I think I want to add that, a third option here is that the community is just a thing that holds true when we talk web2 music and web3 and you have that strong community, that's what pays off. Having worked with a lot of artists in web2, they had lots of streams -- there's still not winning long-term unless they capture that community to  develop those die-hard fans, and web3 makes community a more important thing here. Thanks for letting me come up.
* Chakkra: lucas3.eth touched on something highly key. Pat said that people coming in who are putting out Top-Tier Mid™️ -- just in correlation to an art gallery and they pay for a painting with a red streak in it, they're going to say a whole backstory to what this means to them. There's some purpose and meaning to it. Art for the art's sake - it can survive on its own, but if we're talking about expanding the reach of where that art touches, and who it touches, and the space it exists in, the tech has to be present. lucas3.eth made me think: I don't think I can worry about the Top-Tier Mid™️ to a certain degree, because they had to have built a following, but after a while, well, if the people don't have the community and look through the cash grabs, they may not work out long-term. I guess that's my current question -- in tandem with what James said. It's going to take time to learn the tech. And if you are, will Top-Tier Mid™️ thrive or will it die like everything else in web2 that doesn't sustain properly like we listen to in music? So many artists are no longer making the music that are providing and add to the lifestyle you're living, whether you are 9-5 worker or a son, or someone doing community service or lost a mother. Sometimes -- I juts wonder, can the Top-Tier Mid™️ thrive? What will that landscape look like?
* Blackdave: So, to me, I thought about this a lot. Starting with music, if, we wanted to just sell music for a lot of money, we don't need web3 for that. So that's why tech matters -- if you want to sell it for $100, sell it on Bandcamp, you don't need to make an NFT. I understand that the idea of the value is different, and I'm not saying that I recognize that, but I am saying that someone wants to make money, you don't need to make it an NFT. But people are making NFTs not understanding why they need to be making NFTs. They say music is a utility, but you want your music to be enjoyed, they don't need to buy it. I don't need to buy it if I can just let it exist. I don't consider NFTs art. I consider NFTs products. NFTs will shift alot. NFTs will be productized as they become more useful, but that's what I want to say.
  * James: Hearing you talk about this before, I think at first, I didn't agree until I understood the tech more. And once you realize you get it excited, and sell stuff at high level and have financial freedom, but you do a disservice not understanding.
  * Blackdave: if you don't offer anything else, what makes the music more valuable after collected? Do we wait and see if it is supposed to be a classic? Can you imagine that conversation? Whatever it is -- the battle if something is a classic is almost not good. But, the reason something becomes a classic is not just based on music, but is their cultural impact important and I think if you're making a song into an NFT, there's no reason for me to buy it because I gain nothing a a collector if you don't use the tech.
  * Pat: James and I were having this conversation last night and the whole idea of  \[...] -- we have this opportunity to build community and build connections with the collectors. If somebody for example, bid 3 ETH on a video of mine and you feel comfortable with it, we might have to fly out to your city and hang out for a day. There needs to be more value like a personable experience adding to those things. It's also up to the artist, like you were saying, to make great art that is timeless and over time, people can say, oh no, this is amazing song and it's stuck with me and it's inspired me and there's a general consensus of the art or the music over time and yeah, I definitely -- we were talking about the whole, there needs to be an excellence for the art and tech.
* Almond: \[...]
* Mike Moonman: I was looking at the top and thinking tech or the art... one thing that is missing is the community. For me, I'm in it for the community. I'm a homegrown rapper and try to leave it so many times, so for me, I'm an irish guy who lives in sydney -- scene is not big. I've been trying to think of a way to use these NFTs to make myself relevant that is nowhere relevant or near to USA. I want to find a way that I can make my music to do something with this.
* 10!: I started doing crypto in 2018. I started out making a lot of music and I was a struggling producer. In 2015, I got a pull of momentum and graduated high school -- they ended up getting major level deals. I didn't have the paperwork to capitalize on that and starving at the time. I ended up quitting music and dipping into finance before market crashed, and now life is a bit easier and now we're here: is it tech or the art? Looking at it from a weird perspective like a trifecta: as the dude that was like selling beats for rent money to feed myself, I was like, always at a draw. This fiat stuff -- it's great, it gets the bills paid, and there's not really a backpedal for a bigger outlet. Crypto does give that space and we're still in a space where it is early and there are not really any business model -- Audius tried to do it, but it turned into some Hunger Games shit and we didn't have that full blown sustainability and we can't charge tokens for streams. To what blackdave was saying, we can sell music on bandcamp. I would do limited release vinyls and if you have a t-shirt, you get infinite access to secret library of music that I update but not soundcloud. There is a way to exist for it now, and we have the dApps that can put everything in our own and we can take the middle man out. We don't get hit with the fees, but we have to look at the reality of things like with crypto and decentralization, which is a whole nother conversation. On certain chains, it might be productive and it might seem attractive, but if we used ETH it would be more so harm the user unless they really wanted to give you that. I have traders perspective: I see NFTs to make Ethereum for low-cost low-risk entities. So if you are a 5-year horizon type trader or investor and you understand that, going to 50K itself, that's kind of the race that people are getting into. That's where the apprehension -- is NFT worth it? You're trying to race towards an asset that gets to 50K. The value, when that one person was going to get access to all the shows, that's worth 50K and you need to think at the large scale and get a successful token release and product in crypto going because the uptick is hard to get through. But the art is there and I'm a dude that was shy to NFTs at first because I was staking 32ETH, but now I understand this was social experiment where it's too large to fail and the tech will get better because we're at that point where people are pushing every day. We will get to a place where it is productive and systems that will be better. I think we're close but not quite there. But, the tech is the most important part. The art can be sold in any way, but we don't need a receipt for that, but tech is most important part and that's what we have to focus on.&#x20;
  * Pat: the audience is glitching out because Twitter is bugging out.&#x20;
* musixrebel: I just got into NFTs and all of this stuff. I've been kind of focused on the art for last 3 years. I just wanted to speak on that. Someone spoke to music being in 2014 - 15 is not doing as well today -- I wanted to say that nowadays, art is not in its purest form. Everyone is tracing the `S-sign` now like the superman signs from the past, but it's very important that even though the tech is the most important, but in the same hand, they go hand-in-hand and make sure the music is top-tier. We can't be tracing the same thing over and over again.
  * Pat: as space grows, people will find the freedom and use that in web3 space. It's expected when it's young.&#x20;
* blackdave: Today, I got the opportunity to go to the Discord server for Josh Goodwin (Justin Bieber's engineer). He invited me to talk about web3 and music. We're talking about it from the lens of someone like Justin. I explained that a lot of the biggest music NFTs that come from artists on labels -- independent artists win the most -- but to lean in to the point of the room, I was talking about how owning someone's music NFTs is not just about the music. I love the receipt thing. We need an NFT that enhances the relationship between me and that person and the blockchain and address of the token and that's what matters the most. Every major label artist who has dropped an NFT has done it without music attached to the NFT. Think Eminem, Halsey, Lil Yachty, ASAP Rocky, Snoop Dogg -- any artist on label. There is no music attached to it. The thing that is the real game changer in music NFTs is the artist-to-fan experience, and it's not something that's created. Rather, it's facilitated using music. If you see someone playing the song or fan of the artist, and what NFT does and what web3 does whether NFTs or fungible, is that it can quantify your fandom and create an enhanced experience fan-to-artist experience. If we can create a pathway, I use Rihanna as an example: I bought her the big photo book. And, that's a different level of fan than someone who is a concertgoers tiers (savage fenty, book, first-row) but based on type of token that someone owns, you're now going to be a better brand, business, and product provider, but it's only enabled by the tech. But you get the fans by the music. In web3, is tech more important than art? Sure short-term. But long-term? Art is more important.
* jarrenblair: I dropped a video and song with lackhoney and put it on Glass Protocol, so Lack -- he's been figuring it out for the last few months and got me into it. I'm figuring it out now and how I can use it to my advantage or how it can work. Something I've been listening to is that alot of the value from independent artist monetization -- value comes from experience of your music and how you can bring that in real-life situations (concert tickets, merch) and a lot of the times, when people buy your merch, it's not necessarily the shirt, but they want to remember the experience that comes along with it. I'm trying to see how that can be branched with the NFT thing. Building a community in the NFT space for how to translate that into IRL situations. If a collector collects a certain amount of songs or whatever, giving them free tickets like that, but something I noticed from party bid was like alot of people putting ETH were doing it anonymously or just don't know who they are and it's like, okay, how can I actually translate that? Someone that's just a music fan or hardcore into NFTs and understand how space works, how do you translate that into real life? Hard for me to imagine to get a fangirl to hop into ETH -- so with the tech versus the art thing, the tech is behind for making a casual fan for an independent artist, but I could be wrong. If there's a better way to do that, I want to hear!
  * blackdave: I think -- some people believe this -- NFTs don't have to be expensive. They can be a dollar in value. I think what happens is that artists see other artists and do what they do. If you think of the superman-S-model -- I like wanted to push back against the superman-S-model, because if two people make same art and they have two different brands, but the NFT space is not supposed to be a space for the casual fan in the way it's setup right now. If you want to convert casual to deep fans, you need to meet them where they are than pulling them in. However, there are interesting opportunities to turn casual fans into big fans.&#x20;
    * Example: I have a friend in NYC and she asked me if she should buy The Hundreds NFT. I told her about the brand and they're OGs, and she's like okay, I'm gonna buy it. She gets it speculatively -- this might go up in value, then obviously. \[a] the floor is higher than mint, but \[b] she buys the hundreds clothes and she is fan of the brand and what happened was she was trojan horse'd. She was offering this thing that might have potential upside, but, some of those holders are going to get out and be like, this is kind of like my shit and they stay. Community wins. Community wins, but art won. Sometimes art wins and tech keeps them there. It's interchangeable, but me, blackdave, is the type of guy who is thinking a bajillion steps ahead on ideas.  I want to respond to jarren in case it helps.
* \-- Almond signed out at 6:00PM PST. No further notes were taken.

